  # Quick Start Quide {#QuickStart}

## First steps
1. Before using PlatoSim, make sure the program is correctly @ref InstallUsersDevelopers "installed". 

2. Make sure to set up the correct environment variables as described @ref EvironVar "here".

3. For PlatoSim to work make sure the necessary input files are present in the correct directory. Some of these files will already be included, while others will need to be @ref SupplementaryFiles "downloaded". 

## Setting up the input file and running the simulation

To set up a simulation one can use the `platosim.simulation` module to set up and run the simulation. A simulation object is created by 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.py}
from platosim.simulation import Simulation
	
sim = Simulation(runName, configurationFile=None, outputDir=None, debug=False)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

|Arguments          |              |
|-------------------|--------------|
|`runName`          |  running a Simulation object will create three output files named runName.hdf5, runName.log, runName.yaml           |
|`configurationFile`| this is a start configuration of the Simulation object will have at initialization. If no file is given at initialization the default setting will be the same as those in the `/PlatoSim3/inputfiles/inputfile.yaml`                                                          |
|`outputDir`        | this directory refers to the location where the output files will be created after the Simulation object is run.   |
|`debug`            |  if this option is set to `True` then the Simulation object will print debug information of the steps to the terminal |

It is possible to both get and set the input configurations values after initializing the Simulation object as follows 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.py}
sim["ObservingParameters/BeginExposureNr"] = 0
sim["ObservingParameters/NumExposures"]    = 10

skyBackgroundValue = sim["Sky/SkyBackground"]
print(skyBackgroundValue)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
After the input parameters are set, the simulation can be run by the command 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.py}
sim.run(removeOutputFile=False, logLevel=3)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

|Arguments          |              |
|-------------------|--------------|
|`removeOutputFile` | If this is set to `True` it will delete the output file if such a file already exists. PlatoSim will fail if such a file is present when the simulation runs.|
|`logLevel`         | value is 1, 2 or 3. This determines the verboseness of the log file, ranging from succinct (`logLevel=1`) to verbose (`logLevel=3`)|



## Extract info from HDF5 file

After successfully running the simulation, an output HDF5 file is saved in the `outputDir`. This file can then be open by using a simple gui program like [argos] (https://github.com/titusjan/argos) or from python using the [`h5py`] (https://pypi.org/project/h5py/) package. PlatoSim also offers some additional functionality to access information from the output file.\n

These methods can be found in the `platosim.simfile` module. A `simFile` object serves as a  Python interface to an HDF5 file generated by the Plato Simulator. Within the `PlatoSim3/python/platosim/simfile.py` there is an extensive amount of methods that can be used on `simFile` objects. An useful feature of `Simulation` objects is that the output of the `run()` method is a `simFile` object with the output file of the simulation. Instead of listing all of these we simply show an example of how using these methods might work.\n

### example 1: getting subpixel image from simFile object

~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.py}

from platosim.simulation import Simulation
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import os

output = os.environ["PLATO_WORKDIR"]
sim = Simulation("SubPixelImage", outputDir = output)

sim["ObservingParameters/NumExposures"] = 1
sim["SubField/NumRows"]    = 150
sim["SubField/NumColumns"] = 150

sim["PSF/Model"] = "MappedGaussian"
sim["ControlHDF5Content/WriteSubPixelImages"] = "yes"

simFile = sim.run(removeOutputFile=True)
subPixelImage = simFile.getSubPixelImage(0)
plt.imshow(subPixelImage, origin='lower', cmap="hot")
plt.show()

~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### example 2: getting star coordinates

The method `getStarCatalog` can be used to get information on the stars that were detected on the subfield in at least one exposure. 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.py}
starIDs, RA, dec, Vmag, xFPmm, yFPmm, rowPix, colPix = simFile.getStarCatalog()
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The output if this function is:

|variables  |                                                                          |
|-----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|`starIDs`  |  The line number (starting with 0) of the star in the original stellar input catalog |
|`RA`       |  Right ascension of the star [deg]                                       | 
|`dec`      |  Equatorial declination of the star [deg]                                |
|`Vmag`     |  V magnitude                                                             |
|`xFPmm`    |  Initial planar focal plane coordinates of the stars [mm]|
|`yFPmm`    |  ^ |
|`rowPix`   |  Initial CCD (not subfield) real-valued pixel coordinates of the stars [pix] |
|`colPix`   |  ^ |


To get the coordinates of all stars within a magnitude range [minVmag, maxVmag] in a particular exposure (eg. exposure #10), we can use 

~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.py}
ID, row, col, Xmm, Ymm, flux = simFile.getStarCoordinates(10, minVmag=None, maxVmag=12.0)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The output if this function is:

|variables  |                                                                          |
|-----------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|`ID`       |  The line number (starting with 0) of the star in the original stellar input catalogue |
|`row`      |  The pixel row coordinates of each star in the image [float]. |
|`col`      |  ^ |
|`Xmm`      |  The focal plane coordinates of each star                     |
|`Ymm`      |  ^ |
|`flux`     |  The flux of each star [photons] |

 

## Simulate CCD for N-Camera

A Plato N-Cam CCD consists out of 5 parts, the image section, the readout register, the serial pre-scan, the serial over-scan and the parallel overscan. Note that PlatoSim currently does not simulate serial overscan. (This feature is coming in the future)
@image html /images/full_CCD.png "The left half of a full CCD. The red areas are what is simulated using PlatoSim."


### Simulate exposed part

The exposed part of the CCD is set by the `subfield` parameters in the input file. These parameters are set in the following way: 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~{.py}

from platosim.simulation import Simulation
import numpy as np
from platosim.simulation import Simulation
import numpy as np
import os

output = os.environ["PLATO_WORKDIR"]
sim = Simulation("exposed_part", outputDir = output)

sim["SubField/ZeroPointRow"]    = 245
sim["SubField/ZeroPointColumn"] = 245

sim["SubField/NumRows"]    = 100
sim["SubField/NumColumns"] = 100

starCatalogPath = output + "/stars.txt"

rows       = np.array([300 + 10 * np.sin(n * np.pi / 4) for n in range(8)])
columns    = np.array([300 + 10 * np.cos(n * np.pi / 4) for n in range(8)])
magnitudes =  np.array([12.5 for n in range(8)])
IDs        = np.array([n for n in range(8)])

sim.createStarCatalogFileFromPixelCoordinates(rows, columns, magnitudes, IDs, starCatalogPath)
simFile = sim.run(removeOutputFile=True)
simFile.showImage(0)

~~~~~~~~~~~~~




